---
title: Can AI Teach Students to Think? The Quest for Critical Thinking in a World of Instant Answers.
date: 2025-05-02
category: AI/Tech
readTime: 10 min read
---

The digital age is awash in information, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) rapidly transforms how we interact with information. Its growing presence in education raises concerns about its impact on critical thinking skills. Teachers and students are increasingly exploring AI tools like Gemini, Bard, and ChatGPT, all Natural Language Processing (NLP) technology to enhance learning. Teachers and students are exploring and incorporating AI into their learning and planning routines.

NLP is a branch of technology that helps computers understand and interact with human language (Oracle). It enables speech recognition, language translation, chatbots, and text analysis. It is simply about teaching computers to understand and communicate as humans do. Beyond academia, workforces are also starting to utilize AI (Reeves, 2023). Although AI offers many benefits, its prevalence in education systems weakens students' critical thinking and opinion formation. Our reliance on AI for instant gratification diminishes the crucial space for independent analysis and evaluation, creating a shortcut between us and information that hinders the development of critical thinking and analysis.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are often confused, so it is essential to distinguish between them, particularly when discussing their impact on critical thinking. AI uses algorithms and data to create intelligent computer systems that can perform tasks requiring human-like capabilities, such as analyzing information and responding to spoken or written language (Amazon Web Services; Google Cloud, 2023). This is the broad field of A.I. Self-driving cars and facial recognition are all real-life examples of AI, showing its practical applications (Reeves, 2023). Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI that allows machines or systems to learn and improve automatically from experience (Google Cloud, 2023). In other words, ML is the specific technique that enables AI to learn and adapt. This distinction is important to understand the relationship between AI and ML. While enhancing human efficiency is a key benefit, the ultimate objective of AI and ML research continues to evolve and could encompass broader goals, such as achieving human-level intelligence or solving complex problems beyond human capacity.

A well-known example is Grammarly, a platform that students use; the program detects grammar, spelling, punctuation, word choice, and style mistakes as a person writes on just about any site on the web, such as email and Word document (Mendelson, 2023).

While Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are often seen as recent innovations, the field has a long and rich history. During the 20th century, Alan Turing, a highly skilled mathematician and logician, is widely recognized as the founder of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence. In World War II (1939-1945), he played a crucial role in decrypting the Enigma code, a significant achievement that greatly assisted the Allied Forces in decreasing the number of lives being taken away. The Turing Test, which formed the basis of AI, has been around since then, but AI has only recently been widely utilized. Take the invention of virtual assistants such as Siri and Alexa. Siri was first invented on October 4, 2011 (Jovanovic, 2023) and was implemented on smartphones. Not only have these types of virtual assistance and chatbots gained an increase in popularity, but students worldwide have been utilizing them for many aspects of their academic careers—such as writing, brainstorming, and gathering instant answers.

Traditionally, education has emphasized cultivating critical thinking skills—analyzing situations and evaluating presented claims. Before the rise of AI, students relied solely on their abilities to think critically, research, and analyze problems. However, the modern era of instant information raises questions about this skill set's impact. In today's digital age, people see and hear unprecedented information (Anderson & Perrin, 2018). The current prevalence of misinformation and the blurring of opinion and fact highlights the necessity for enhancing our critical thinking skills by developing technology to things such as generative AI.

Generative AI is artificial intelligence that can create new information, such as text, images, or code. This can be helpful in many ways, but it also raises concerns because it can be difficult to tell if the information generated by AI is reliable.

Interviews with college students aged 18-22 revealed mixed views on AI's impact on work ethic. While many acknowledged its convenience and efficiency in academic and personal settings, concerns arose regarding overreliance. Students generally saw AI as a driver of innovation, contributing to societal advancements, economic growth, and their learning. However, one anonymous respondent expressed a valid concern: excessive dependence on AI could create an accessibility gap, leaving those in less developed regions behind. Their point highlighted the importance of human ingenuity in adapting to different environments. Despite the benefits of AI, such as verifying information and providing reassurance, students acknowledged potential downsides associated with this comfort.

The increasing use of generative AI has raised concerns about its impact on human behavior. Industry experts like Kumar (2019) worry that AI automation could promote laziness and addiction. In psychology, human decision-making is often guided by mental shortcuts or "heuristics." These shortcuts can help us make faster decisions, which is especially important in today's fast-paced world, but they can sometimes lead to errors in judgment. In this case, ChatGPT is an example of human behavior in heuristics. As individuals, people all strive to find ways to obtain information quickly and efficiently. ChatGPT serves as an excellent example of a tool that can help people achieve this goal. Individuals will have a stronger inclination to achieve their goals more efficiently. Due to this, Experts have found a link between the usage of AI and the increase in people's lack of originality and critical thinking (Amin & Uddin, 2023). This leads to a pattern of reliance for students, elevating the risk of academic dishonesty and plagiarism.

Students who are genuinely curious and make an effort to understand the material in both homework and classroom settings are more likely to dive deeper into their thoughts. This advances them into thinking critically for themselves, bringing back the goal of education. Studies have shown that the more educated someone is, the higher their literacy skills are. This leads to a higher employment rate at a high-paying job (Vignoles & Cherry, 2016). However, with the rise of AI, more and more students are inclined to use AI. The search for instant answers not only lies in classroom settings, for instance, googling a simple question, to the consumer's side of things, where platforms such as Instagram and YouTube encourage people to buy products that promise immediate pleasure or satisfaction. This behavior leads to a loop in consumerism, where people constantly buy more and more to fill a sense of emptiness or dissatisfaction (Rubtsov, 2023). The most common are TikTok and Reels, which promote videos that suit one’s taste. Whenever a button on social media is pressed or when a person gains a like on their posts, these are the two aspects that, as Brown University Public Health announces, “…the presence of the like button allows instant gratification, which drives habitual use and addiction through positive reinforcement” (Petrillo, 2021). This type of addiction curates impatience and a lack of desire for delayed gratification, which is an individual’s ability to “forgo immediate rewards for the sake of more valuable ones later…(Bembenutty, 2011)”. In other words, this is the ability to put aside the want and need to get a “reward” instantly after doing something but wait longer for the reward to be greater or more. A modern example of delayed gratification is going to school to obtain an education, despite its challenges, to secure a better job in the future with a degree rather than skipping classes and wasting time.

Furthermore, the constant availability of answers can lead to a reliance on instant solutions, potentially hindering the development of independent thinking skills (Kasneci et al., 2023). Students accustomed to readily available information might struggle to persevere through challenges or delve deeper into complex topics. This could, in turn, affect their problem-solving abilities and overall learning approach. This trend could significantly challenge future efforts to improve critical thinking and literacy skills later if left unaddressed. Students who view homework as busy work are less likely to see its value and may choose not to complete it (Letterman, 2013). Similarly, the ease of access to AI solutions tempts students to rely on them excessively, potentially neglecting the crucial learning process of independent exploration and problem-solving. Educators share similar concerns. A study by Prothero (2023) found that 62% believe using tools like ChatGPT negatively impacts students' work ethic, such as plagiarism and academic dishonesty. This can lead to decreased teacher motivation and suspicion that submitted work may not be authentic.

Upon the launch of ChatGPT to the general public, it gained up to one million users within the first five days of launch (Duarte, 2024). Following its launch, user numbers skyrocketed, doubling from December to January and reaching 13 million (Hu, 2023). Surveys indicate a high prevalence of student use, with a calculated average of 69% across various universities admitting to using ChatGPT (Intelligent, 2024; Sidoti & Gottfried, 2023; Nam, 2023). Alarmingly, 86% of these students reported bypassing detection (Intelligent, 2024). Surveys further indicate a trend of AI use among younger students aged 13-17 (Intelligent, 2024). A significant portion of students reportedly rely on AI tools to assist with or complete their work. Students who develop a habit of using AI without proper critical evaluation may struggle to develop independent thinking skills and could experience a false sense of accomplishment. These factors, in turn, could negatively impact future work ethic and literacy skills as they navigate the demands of adulthood and professional careers. This overreliance on AI-generated content raises concerns beyond immediate student work ethic. Data from the National Center for Education Statistics (2023) paints a concerning picture: many adults already struggle with critical literacy skills. Over half (50%) of American adults lack literacy skills exceeding a 6th-grade level, and even among those considered literate, average scores on standardized tests remain low. Despite widespread recognition of critical thinking's importance, the Critical Thinking Report survey (2019) found that 94% of respondents valued it highly, yet 86% believed these skills were lacking. Even more concerning, a quarter reported a decline in their critical thinking abilities since high school.

The widespread adoption of AI tools raises concerns about its potential impact on critical thinking skills. While 86% of people believed these skills needed to be improved in 2020 (Critical Thinking Report, (2019); Zauderer, 2022), increased reliance on readily available, pre-digested information from AI could worsen this concern. If students become accustomed to readily available, pre-digested information, it is unlikely that AI use will substantially improve national literacy rates of becoming more literate. As literacy is the foundation for critical thinking, society must develop more vital literacy skills to navigate the complexities of the information age. A decline in literacy could lead to difficulties in analyzing information, evaluating sources, and forming independent judgments. This, in turn, could hinder overall learning and innovation while posing significant challenges for individuals and society.

A recent case involving a lawyer who used ChatGPT to prepare for court exemplifies the potential dangers of overreliance on AI. A lawyer from a law firm used AI to generate false legal information to present in court (Cerullo, 2023). While this situation may seem comical, it highlights a serious concern. If legal professionals with extensive training can be misled by AI-generated content, students accustomed to such resources may struggle to develop critical thinking skills essential for evaluating the validity of information encountered online.

While concerns exist regarding the potential negative impacts of AI on critical thinking, there are also significant benefits of this newly developed technology and its responsible integration into education. Studies like the "Survey Research on Teacher Experiences" (2024) indicate that responsible use of AI tools can lead to positive outcomes. The research suggests that educators who smartly control ChatGPT use and even utilize it themselves observe students employing it for deeper learning. This highlights the importance of curating an environment where AI is used ethically and strategically while allowing students to explore innovations. Furthermore, research by Kasneci et al. (2023) suggests that generative AI like ChatGPT can assist students by providing relevant information and research resources, even suggesting unexplored aspects of a topic. This can ultimately enhance students' understanding and analysis of the material.

Professional educators have suggested strategies for fostering an environment where AI and students learn alongside each other (Blose, 2023; Aithal & Silver, 2023). These include but are not limited to:

- **Transparency and Ethics:** Discuss academic integrity policies with students to ensure clarity about acceptable and unacceptable uses of AI tools.
- **Integration and Evaluation:** Combine AI with traditional resources like course materials to encourage critical thinking about the information presented. Design assignments that require independent thinking and analysis, such as personal narratives or critical reasoning exercises.
- **Understanding and Analysis:** Train students to evaluate AI-generated information. This can involve asking students to identify potential biases within the content or comparing AI-generated content with original writing and anything inaccurate.
- **Reverse engineering:** Rewriting and paraphrasing AI-written content and comparing it to original work can deepen students' understanding of writing styles and human creativity.

Generative AI presents a powerful tool for education, fostering critical thinking, and aiding research. Looking beyond the scope of education, integrating AI into society presents challenges and opportunities. While concerns regarding its potential impact are valid, a complete rejection of AI's potential would be shortsighted. The key lies in striking a balance and responsible usage. Ultimately, it is not the technology that matters but how we interact with it. Educators can transform AI into a learning companion, not a substitute for independent thoughts, by equipping students with strong critical thinking skills and promoting responsible AI use. This way, we can unlock a future brimming with possibilities for innovation and education, where AI serves as a guiding hand on the path to knowledge and advancements.

### References

- Aithal, V., & Silver, J. (2023, March 30). _Enhancing critical thinking skills with AI-assisted technology_. World of Better Learning | Cambridge University Press.
  `https://www.cambridge.org/elt/blog/2023/03/30/enhancing-learners-critical-thinking-skills-with-ai-assisted-technology/`
- Amazon Web Services. (n.d.). _AI vs Machine Learning - Difference Between Artificial Intelligence and ML - AWS_. Amazon Web Services, Inc.
  `https://aws.amazon.com/compare/the-difference-between-artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning/#:~:text=AI%20includes%20everything%20from%20smart`
- Amin, M., & Uddin, S. S. (2023). _The Downside of Artificial Intelligence for Intellectuals in The Asian Society_. International Journal of Social Science & Entrepreneurship, 3(4), 341–353.
  `https://doi.org/10.58661/ijsse.v3i4.240`
- Aron, J. (n.d.). _Alan Turing_. New Scientist.
  `https://www.newscientist.com/people/alan-turing/#:~:text=Often%20considered%20the%20father%20of`
- Bembenutty, H. (2011). Academic delay of gratification and academic achievement. _New Directions for Teaching and Learning_, 2011(126), 55–65.
  `https://doi.org/10.1002/tl.444`
- Blose, A. (2023, June 8). _Try This - How ChatGPT Can Help With Your Lesson Plans | NEA_. Www.nea.org.
  `https://www.nea.org/nea-today/all-news-articles/try-how-chatgpt-can-help-your-lesson-plans#:~:text=To%20generate%20ideas%20for%20lesson`
- Cardona, M. A., Rodriguez, R. J., & Ishmael, K. (2023). _Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning Insights and Recommendations_. Office of Educational Technology.
  `https://www2.ed.gov/documents/ai-report/ai-report.pdf`
- Cerullo, M. (2023, May 29). _A lawyer used ChatGPT to prepare a court filing. It went horribly awry._ Www.cbsnews.com.
  `https://www.cbsnews.com/news/lawyer-chatgpt-court-filing-avianca/`
- Critical Thinking Survey Report. (n.d.). Retrieved April 30, 2024, from
  `https://reboot-foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/_docs/Critical_Thinking_Survey_Report.pdf`
- Duarte, F. (2024, March 27). _Number of ChatGPT Users (2023)_. Exploding Topics.
  `https://explodingtopics.com/blog/chatgpt-users`
- Google Cloud. (2023). _AI vs. Machine Learning: How Do They Differ?_ Google Cloud.
  `https://cloud.google.com/learn/artificial-intelligence-vs-machine-learning`
- Hu, K. (2023, February 2). ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base. _Reuters_.
  `https://www.reuters.com/technology/chatgpt-sets-record-fastest-growing-user-base-analyst-note-2023-02-01/`
- Intelligent. (2024, February 27). _4 in 10 College Students Are Using ChatGPT On Assignments_. Intelligent.
  `https://www.intelligent.com/4-in-10-college-students-are-using-chatgpt-on-assignments/#:~:text=ChatGPT%20most%20commonly%20used%20for`
- Jovanovic, P. (2023, April 21). _The History and Evolution of Virtual Assistants_. Tribulant Blog.
  `https://tribulant.com/blog/software/the-history-and-evolution-of-virtual-assistants-from-simple-chatbots-to-todays-advanced-ai-powered-systems/`
- Kasneci, E., Seßler, K., Küchemann, S., Bannert, M., Dementieva, D., Fischer, F., Gasser, U., Groh, G., Günnemann, S., Hüllermeier, E., Krusche, S., Kutyniok, G., Michaeli, T., Nerdel, C., Pfeffer, J., Poquet, O., Sailer, M., Schmidt, A., Seidel, T., & Stadler, M. (2023). _ChatGPT for Good? On Opportunities and Challenges of Large Language Models for Education_. Chatgpt for Good? On Opportunities and Challenges of Large Language Models for Education, 3.
  `https://doi.org/10.35542/osf.io/5er8f`
- Kumar, S. (2019, November 25). _Advantages and Disadvantages of Artificial Intelligence_. Medium; Towards Data Science.
  `https://towardsdatascience.com/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-artificial-intelligence-182a5ef6588c`
- Letterman, D. (2013). Students Perception Of Homework Assignments And What Influences Their Ideas. _Journal of College Teaching & Learning (TLC)_, 10(2), 113.
  `https://doi.org/10.19030/tlc.v10i2.7751`
- Mendelson, E. (2023, December 6). _Grammarly Review_. PCMAG.
  `https://www.pcmag.com/reviews/grammarly`
- Nam, J. (2023, November 22). _56% of College Students Have Used AI on Assignments or Exams | BestColleges_. Www.bestcolleges.com.
  `https://www.bestcolleges.com/research/most-college-students-have-used-ai-survey/#:~:text=56%25%20of%20College%20Students%20Have%20Used%20AI%20on%20Assignments%20or%20Exams`
- Oracle. (n.d.). _What Is Natural Language Processing (NLP)?_ Oracle.com.
  `https://www.oracle.com/artificial-intelligence/what-is-natural-language-processing/#:~:text=Natural%20language%20processing%20(NLP)%20is`
- Petrillo, S. (2021, December 13). _What Makes TikTok so Addictive?: An Analysis of the Mechanisms Underlying the World’s Latest Social Media Craze_. Brown Undergraduate Journal of Public Health; Brown University School of Public Health.
  `https://sites.brown.edu/publichealthjournal/2021/12/13/tiktok/`
- Prothero, A. (2023, September 29). _How Students Use AI vs. How Teachers Think They Use It, in Charts_. Education Week.
  `https://www.edweek.org/technology/how-students-use-ai-vs-how-teachers-think-they-use-it-in-charts/2023/09`
- Raeburn, A. (2024, January 15). Green means go? That’s a heuristic. Asana.
  `https://asana.com/resources/heuristics`
- Reeves, S. (2023, January 24). _8 helpful everyday examples of artificial intelligence_. IoT for All.
  `https://www.iotforall.com/8-helpful-everyday-examples-of-artificial-intelligence`
- Rubtsov, A. (2023, March 13). _Instant Gratification in the Age of Technology: A Manager’s View_. Www.linkedin.com.
  `https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/instant-gratification-age-technology-managers-view-aleksey-rubtsov/`
- Sidoti, O., & Gottfried, J. (2023, November 16). _About 1 in 5 U.S. teens who’ve heard of ChatGPT have used it for schoolwork_. Pew Research Center.
  `https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2023/11/16/about-1-in-5-us-teens-whove-heard-of-chatgpt-have-used-it-for-schoolwork/`
- Survey Research on Teacher Experiences. (2024). In _Center for Democracy & Technology_. Center for Democracy & Technology.
  `https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/FINAL-Teacher-Spot-Poll-Slides.pdf`
- Vignoles, A., & Cherry, G. (2016). What is the economic value of literacy and numeracy? _IZA World of Labor_, 2.
  `https://doi.org/10.15185/izawol.229`
- Zauderer, S. (2022, November 29). _55 US Literacy Statistics: Literacy Rate, Average Reading Level_. Www.crossrivertherapy.com; Cross River Therapy.
  `https://www.crossrivertherapy.com/research/literacy-statistics#:~:text=Nationwide%2C%20on%20average%2C%2079%25`
